# ISI-WFP

## Overview

In 2019 alone, more than 135 million people across 55 countries faced crisis levels of acute food insecurity or worse, requiring urgent humanitarian and livelihood assistance. Prior to any intervention, the UN World Food Programme (WFP) undertakes an analysis of the food security situation in an area or country to determine the most appropriate operational response. This analysis includes projections, based on expert opinion, on how the situation will evolve, but no mathematical model is currently available to provide robust quantitative estimates. To fill this need, in this work we develop a machine learning model to forecast the evolution of a food security-related indicator: the Food Consumption Score (FCS). As the FCS is affected by the evolution of contextual variables, e.g. market prices, conflicts, precipitation or vegetation, etc., we include the associated time-series in order to investigate their causal links with food insecurity. This analysis is performed using a measure that detects the amount of direct transfer of information between couples of time-series, the Symbolic Transfer Entropy (STE).
Next, we focus on obtaining 30-days predictions for the food insecurity time-series employing the eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) machine learning algorithm. The effectiveness of our forecasting algorithm is tested for the provinces of Yemen and Syria over 2020. The results are promising and bode well for future implementation in WFP policy-making.

## Structure

We have divided the main analyzes of the project into several folders. The *packages* folder contains some custom packages used by other folders of the project. For good navigation within the project, we recommend that you first examine folders *Data Sources* and then *Dataset time-series*. The other folders (except the folder *packages*) are strictly dependent on the results of these two folders. In particular the recommended order for examining the other folders is as follows: *Correlation*, *Symbolic Transfer Entropy* and *Time-series Forecasting*.
